How does Shakespeare present the supernatural in Macbeth?

Shakespeare presents the paranormal and magical events in ”Macbeth”, based around the seventeenth century English understanding of “supernatural”. Supernatural activities were usually seen as evil and Shakespeare takes rudimentary fears and in due course, presents them in the form of supernatural events such as ungodly witches, appalling ghosts and bloody daggers.

‘Macbeth’’s first surfacing of evil begins at the very start of the play; the arrival of the witches, which were seen as evil and wicked, proceed to predict the future. These 2 supernatural occurrences call attention to how the supernatural will be a recurring theme in the play and the fact that the witches are not normal nor human. The first thing that Banquo does when he sees the witches say “What are these creatures? ”, already demonstrating that the witches’ appearance is not human and otherworldly with the word “creatures”. The idea of something being hard to identify or badly known to mankind has strong connotations with the supernatural. By choosing the word “creature”, Shakespeare would have made the Jacobean think deeper about this witches. The word would have also invoked fear in a Jacobean audience, in fact, by starting “Macbeth” off with 3 supernatural creatures, who are witches, Shakespeare would already have stirred up fear and excitement not only in a Jacobean-era person but the King himself, James I, who encouraged the prosecution of witches. By using the word “creature”, Shakespeare increases the fear and covers the 3 being in mystery, making sure that his readers and audience are on the edge of their chair, including King James I as well. This scene, along with the Act 1 Scene 1, where the witches first appear, “Thunder and lightning. Enter three WITCHES”, needs the stage to be dim and dark, which allows Shakespeare to set the mood. In these scenes, Shakespeare uses pathetic fallacy to his advantage, as the dark and dim lighting have connotations with evil, mystery and fear, but most importantly, the pathetic fallacy enforces the supernatural in these scenes, making the Jacobean audience believe that this dis-liked weather was brought upon by the witches. The witches proceed to appear in various more scenes, each one displaying an un-earth-like event. And one of the most important things about the witches which the Jacobean audience would have immediately noticed is the witches’ language. They talk in rhymes, each one of them knowing as if by magic after which witch to speak and what to say to make it all rhyme. A great example of this is “FIRST WITCH: When shall we three meet again? In thunder, lightning, or in rain? SECOND WITCH: When the hurly-burly’s done, When the battle’s lost and won.”. In this quote, the witches are deciding when they should meet again. The way they grammatically structure their sentence and rhyme already sends a shiver down one’s spine. Every one of these scenes displays acts of supernatural occurrences, which frighten the audience as the supernatural was strongly feared. Supernatural beings which were thought to exist, such as witches, were executed. They were not burnt at the stake, but be-headed. These executions were at an all-time high at the time “Macbeth” was published, due to the King James I encouraging the prosecutions of witches, allowing Shakespeare to play of his audience’s fear and make the play more dramatic. 

The witches actions at the start of the play would introduce the audience to supernatural, casting it in a negative light.This, subsequently, affects Macbeth through-out the play, forcing him to make in-adequate decessions, eventually making him rely on the super natural. When Macbeth and Banquo hear the predictions from these witches and immediately see one of them come true, Banquo warns Macbeth that “The agents of evil often tell us part of the truth to lead us to our destruction.” in Act 1 Scene 3, meaning that one simple truth can make a person do something very unnatural for him, which we proceed to see MacBeth do throughout the play such as the bloody regicide of King Duncan and Banqou’s murder. Banquo had predicted the outcome of the witches’ predictions and the act in itself was one of the only predictions in the play that did not supernaturally affect anyone as Banquo was a human. The acts of inhumanity that Macbeth proceeds to do in the play, are showing the audience that Macbeth no longer relies on reality, but on the supernatural. Macbeth also affects people close to him in negative ways with his reliance on the supernatural. After he wrote a letter to his wife about what he saw and what had happened, his wife also began to rely on the supernatural and abandoned all humanlike thinking. All of these supernatural events were leading up to regicide and multiple murders. Macbeth suddenly did stop and think and stop relying on the supernatural before the night of the murder, but his wife, who had been engulfed by the supernatural, did not like this and convinced him that he should go on and commit regicide by killing King Duncan.

Banquo’s ghost, which appears while Macbeth and lady Macbeth are entertaining their guests at a dinner table, reminds Macbeth of the people he had immorality killed. The ghost is presented as a representation of MacBeth’s fears and guilts and shows that Macbeth is now bloodlust and a killer. A ghost would have frightened an early seventeenth-century audience as it is a sign of death, and one of the most iconic things of the supernatural. Banquo’s ghost tells us that Macbeth has completely been taken over by the supernatural as a normal human, would not have visions, or see ghosts. The appearance of the ghosts also tells us about Macbeth's mental state. He appears anxious, not confident and guilty. Along with Lady MacBeth’s hallucinations at night where she went to clean her hands from imaginary blood, let us believe that the two were suffering from some sort of mental illness, which was already a taboo in the seventeenth century and considered “supernatural”. Because of the mental illnesses, the audience would have been led to believe that Macbeth was obsessed and possessed by the supernatural, thus enforcing their beliefs that the two were now evil. 

On the night before the regicide, Lady Macbeth knew that she could not bring herself to do it, so she summoned and called upon “spirits” to fill her with “cruelty”. This is seen as supernatural and would have frightened the audience even more. Since she asked to be filled with cruelty by a spirit, Shakespeare is telling us that the supernatural is full of evil and wickedness. By using words as “make”, she is giving the impression that she has control over these spirits, showing us that she is doing something supernatural, thus meaning that she is evil. 

Lady Macbeth's hallucinations and wishes show her madness - and her downfall to death. As she becomes even more mentally unstable throughout the play, which was seen as an act of the supernatural, she begins to hallucinate severely and is often seen going to a sink in the middle of the night to wash the imaginary blood off her hands. This tells us that she is trying to get rid of the thoughts of her sins. The use of the word “sins” leads us to connect all the events to hell, which is also a supernatural place which is feared by the seventeenth-century people. She uses words like “damned” to also let us associate all the blood and sins with hell.

At Act 1 Scene 2, when the witches praise MacBeth and let him know of all the things he will achieve in his life, he sees them as friendly creatures that are there to help him. By the end of the play, that is not the case as he sees that they have only brought him grief and sins and how he would have been much better off by not listening to the witches. The thought of Macbeth not having committed regicide and having ignored the witches, would also be considered as supernatural as time was not understood that well and thinking of something that could have happened that had not happened, after all these events, would also have been considered to be supernatural.

Macbeth's following through with the act of regicide was mostly due to the bloody daggers that he saw when going to King Duncan’s room. We are certain these were hallucinations, but a seventeenth-century person would see this as an act of the supernatural thus solidifying their beliefs that the supernatural was evil and against Macbeth and Lady Macbeth. This leads us to believe that they were relying on the supernatural and letting it determine their future. Macbeth allows the supernatural to change his beliefs around certain things such as his ambition to stop doing his duty which is to protect the King which was seen as a leader appointed by God, leading us to know that Macbeth was being influenced by the evil supernatural as doing something against god would have been seen as evil. This was a clear message that the supernatural had fully taken control of Macbeth and that he was heavily relying on it. Throughout the play, we see that all the supernatural occurrences have led to terrible things and events and Banquo’s ghost was a warning that MacBeth would pay for his sins. Macbeth was later killed by Banquo’s son, which later on became King, making the witches’ prophecy come true once again.
To conclude, Shakespeare presents the supernatural in Macbeth through acts of humans, evil and fantasy creatures. Supernatural is presented as something people should fear and could only lead to bad things.


